
Introduction

This project combines Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) and The Census Bureau's Current Population Survey (CPS) data from two different time periods (1967 and 2007) to present a snapshot of industry, and demographic characteristics of the workers that drove that industry in those respective times.  Because the BEA has altered its methodology over the decades, the data for 1967 and 2007 are not available in directly comparable forms.  As a result, the procedure for the 1967 data and the 2007 data differ significantly in the details of execution.  However, in broad terms, the procedures for the two time periods are essentially the same.

The following, relatively brief, outline of procedure will be written in terms broad enough that there will be little distinction between the 1957 and 2008 procedures.  This outline will not be even close to sufficient to replicate the methodology used in this project.  It should, however, give the reader a basic overview and of context of what was a lengthy and technically complex procedure.  Later sections in this chapter will explore each element of the procedure in detail.


Basic vocabulary

In order to make sense of any description of the procedure, some basic vocabulary is necessary.

BEA Benchmark Input-Output Accounts - On a semi-regular basis, the BEA produces accounts of the US economy which show, in dollars, how much output is produced by industries, how much of a given commodity  an industry must consume in order to produce its output, and what output is consumed by final uses (e.g., exports, personal consumption expenditures or government spending).  These accounts are released in both summary level (dividing the economy into approximately 100 industries) and the detailed level (dividing the economy in to approximately 400 industries).  This project only makes use of summary level data.


Use Table - Use tables are one of the three major tables released in the benchmark input-output accounts (the others being make tables and bridge tables).  A use table is a matrix of industries and commodities which represents the total output of the economy in a single year.  Its columns represent either industries, final uses, or various totals derived by summing rows or parts of rows.  Its rows represent either commodities or totals derived by summing columns or parts of columns.  If a column represents an industry, any cell in that column represents the amount (in millions of dollars) of a commodity that were used by that industry in order to produce that industry's output for the year.  If a column represents a final use, a single cell represents the amount of that commodity consumed by the final use (e.g.  U.S.  consumers).  The use table includes several value added "commodities": wages paid to workers, taxes paid to the government, and profits.

Make Table - Make tables are one of the three major tables released in the benchmark input-output accounts (the others being use tables and bridge tables).  A make table is a matrix of commodities and industries which represents the total value of all of the commodities produced in a single year.  A cell of the matrix represents how much (in millions of dollars) of a given commodity (the column) was produced by a given industry (the row).

Industry to Industry Use Table - An industry to Industry use table is a matrix very similar to a normal use table, except that both its columns and its rows represent industries.  A single cell represents the total output (in millions of dollars) from one industry (the row) that is consumed by another industry (the column) to produce the column industry's total output.  For the rest of this chapter, the column industries will be referred to as "consuming industries", as they consume the output of the row industries.  The row industries will be referred to as "producing industries", as they produce the output which is then consumed by the consuming industries.  Each industry appears in an Industry to Industry Use table twice, once as a producing industry, and once as a consuming industry.  An industry to industry use table can be derived by combining a make table and a use table, and the procedure to do so is discussed later in this chapter.

Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) Bridge Table - A PCE bridge table contains lists of types of expenditures by industries that produce the good or service.  Many expenditures are listed multiple times, as many industries produced that good or service that year.  Columns include the value of the good in producer's prices, transportation expenses, wholesale and retail trade margins, and the value of the good purchaser's prices.  The total value of the purchaser's prices is the same as the total value of the PCE column in the use table for the same year.



Procedure


Value Added

The procedure outlined below is conducted twice, once on data from 1967 and once on data from 2007.  The only difference between the 1967 and 2007 procedure that will be discussed is that in 2007, an industry to industry use table is derived as the very first step.  This is unnecessary in 1967, as its use table was already in an industry to industry form.

In order to derive the 2007 Industry to Industry Use Table, both the 2007 Make and Use tables are combined as follows.  First, all of the value added rows from the Use table are temporarily discarded .  Then the cells in both tables are reduced to proportions.  Each cell in the use table is divided by its industry total, while each cell in the make table is divided by its commodity total.  These percentage tables are joined together by commodity, resulting in a 3 dimension matrix with the axes Producing Industry by Commodity by Consuming Industry.  Each cell of commodity and consuming multiplied by each other and totaled by producing industry.  The commodities are then dropped, creating a two dimensional matrix of producing industry by consuming industry.  Each cell of this new matrix is multiplied by the total output of its consuming industry.  The discarded value added and intermediate output rows are added back into the table, resulting in the 2007 industry to industry use table.

From this point on, any procedure done to one year can be assumed to be done to both.

The industry to industry use table for both years is altered to remove the effects of capital consumption.  Using data from the BEA National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) tables, the total capital consumed by each consuming industry in the use table is calculated (in many cases, this total is zero).  This capital consumption is added, as additional required input, to specific industries that contribute to capital consumption.  The profits of each consuming industry are then reduced by the cost increase.  This ensures a consuming industry's total output remains the same, even though the total of the producing industries has increased.  The new table produced by this procedure may be called an Industry to Industry Use Table with Capital Consumption Removed.


During this step, the total output of each industry (or final use) s accounted fro purely in terms of value directly and indirectly added to an industry.  It should be noted that at the end of this process, the total of all industries' value added will be well above GDP.  This is not a problem, as this value added table will be used only for its ratios.  E.g., approximately 6.8% of the value added to the industry "Oil and Gas Extraction" comes from the "Pipeline Transportation" industry.

The first step is to calculate a direct requirements ratio table.  For each consuming industry, the three value added "producing industries" are combined to create a single value added industry.  Then a total output is calculated, and each producing industry's contribution to that consuming industry is divided by that consuming industry's total output.

A new value added table is created which is a replica of the industry to industry use table except that all of its cells are filled with zeros, except for the cells where the producing and consuming industries are the same industry.  The value of those cells is set to the value of the value add for that industry in the use table.

Using the direct requirements ratio, the industry to industry use table with capital consumption removed, and the new value added table, an iterative process is undertaken which calculates value indirectly added to each industry.  At each sept of the process:

1) In the industry to industry use table, each cell is decreased by its producing industry's value added ratio.  The amout that the cell is decreased by is added to the corresponding cell in the new value added table.

2) For each column in the industry to industry use table, the remaining value in each cell is redistributed in the column at a rate determined by the producing industry's corresponding consuming industry's column in the direct requirements ratio table.

As the iterative process proceeds, the total of all the cells in the industry to industry Use table approaches zero, while the total of all the cells in the value added table approaches the original total of the industry to industry use table.  The only exception to this is that, as the value an industry adds to itself is already accounted for, at each step of the process, any cell in which the consuming and producing industries are the same industry is replaced with a zero.  The process is repeated 16 times, ensuring that the total of the cells in the value added table is over 99.9% of the original total of the industry to industry use table.

Once the industry proportion of imports table is created, a new producing industry, "direct imports", is added to the value added table based on this proportion.  The cells in this producing industry are set to the proportion of imports multiplied by the total value of the consuming industry.  The remaining cells in each consuming industry are then reduced by a proportion sufficient to main the original total of the consuming industry.

Finally, each cell is divided by the total value of the consuming industry, so that the total value for each consuming industry becomes 1.  This converts the value added table into a "Value Added Ratio Table".

Each PCE item on the PCE Bridge Table is categorized into one of these eight categories: Food, Transportation, Clothing & Personal Care, Business Services, Recreation and Leisure, Personal Services, Housing and  Household Operations, Education, and Health.  For each of these eight eight categories, the value for the transportation columns in the PCE bridge table is aggregated into an appropriate transportation producing industry.  Similarly, the aggregate value of the wholesale margin of the PCE bridge table is added to the wholesale producing industry, as is the aggregate of the retail margin column added to the retail producing industry.  Finally, the value (in producer's value) for each category is aggregated by the producing industry.

The producing industries in the PCE Bridge Table are relabeled as consuming industries and joined with the Value Added Ratio table.  This temporarily creates a three dimensional matrix, with its axes being Category by Consuming Industry, by Producing Industry.  Each Producing Industry ratio is multiplied by the dollar value of its Consuming Industry.  The producing industries are aggregated by category, dropping the consuming industry out of the matrix and returning the matrix to two dimensions.  The imports industry of this new matrix is relabeled as "Indirect Imports", and the "Direct Imports" that were set aside are added back to the matrix, creating a "Value Added by Category" table.

Going back to the Industry to Industry use table, the various government final sue consuming industries (e.g.  "Federal Government nondefense: Consumption expenditures", etc.) are aggregated into a single Government consuming industry.  That Government consuming industry, as well as the Investment and Exports consuming industries, are set aside as an Investment, Exports, Government table (IXG Table).

This paragraph describes a procedure largely similar to the one in step five, expect that it is applied to the IXG Table instead of the PCE bridge table.  The producing industries in the IXG Bridge Table are relabeled as consuming industries and joined with the Value Added Ratio table.  This temporarily creates a three dimensional matrix, with its axes being Category by Consuming Industry, by Producing Industry.  Each Producing Industry ratio is multiplied by the dollar value of its Consuming Industry.  The producing industries are aggregated by category, dropping the consuming industry out of the matrix and returning the matrix to two dimensions.  The imports industry of this new matrix is relabeled as "Indirect Imports", and the "Direct Imports" that were set aside are added back to the matrix, creating a "Value Added by IXG" table.

Finally the Value Added by Category table is combined with the Value Added by IXG table, to create a Value Added by Category, Investment, Exports, and Government table (Value Added by CIXG Table).

The above steps resulted in totals of imports (both direct and indirect) for PCEs, Imports, Exports, and Government that were inconsistent with #### some other totals.  To remedy this descripency, imports were adjusted accordingly.  The 8 categories of PCEs are temporarily aggregated into a single PCE total.  For each item of PCEs and IXG, a total imports was calculated (direct + indirect) and compared to the expected total imports.  For IXG, both direct and indirect imports are multipled by an amount necessary to bring their total up to the expected value.  The, all the other producing industries are multiplied by an amount necessary to preserve the total value of that segment of IXG.  For PCEs, a ratio is calculated that would be necessary to bring all of the PCE imports up to the previously published totals, as well as a ratio to multiply the other producing industries by what would be necessary to preserve the aggregate total of PCEs.  The aggregate total is then discarded, and the individual eight categories each have their imports (both direct and indirect) multiplied by the appropriate ratio, as well as their other producing industries multiplied by the other ratio.

In order to provide a more comprehensible summary of the somewhat unwieldy value added by CIXG table, each producing industry (with the exceptions of Direct and Indirect Imports) are categorized into one of ten Industry Categories: Business Services, Construction and Utilities, Manufacturing, Personal Services, Transportation and Wholesale, Education, Government, Health, Housing, and Primary Industries.  For each segment of CIXG< the producing industries are aggregated by ten industry category.  Direct and Indirect Imports remain unaffected by this aggegation.  This produces a Value Added by Ten Industry Category and CIXG Table.

This follows a procedure identical to the three preceding steps, expect that in step 5, PCEs are not aggregated into the eight categories.  Instead, the approximately 120 pce categories (depending on the period) are left as separate items.  Any mention of eight categories in steps 5, 6, and 7, can be replaced with PCE categories.  The result of this altered procedure is a Value Added by PCEs + IXG Table, as well as a Value Added by PCEs + IXG and Ten Category table.




Worker Demographics

All of the following steps are applied to 1967 and 2007 separately.  Three years worth of CPS data (1967-1969 for 1967 and 2007-2009 for 2007) are downloaded.  All unemployed or not in the labor force persons are dropped and wages are adjusted to 2009 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.  Quintiles of wages are calculated for all people, for men alone, and for women alone.  All people are classified into 5 age groups, as well as 5 education levels.  All people are also classified into 21 categories of occupations, as well as 15 categories of industry/occupation combinations.  Because Census industry codes are not directly comparable to BEA industry codes, the Census industry codes are converted to BEA industry codes by means of a Census to BEA industry code crosswalk.  Finally, after the BEA industry codes are present, each BEA industry is further categorized in to the ten industry categories discussed in step 8.  This recoded CPS dataset will be referred to as the Recoded CPS Dataset.

Returning to the Value Added by CIXG Table (step 6), row totals for each producing industry are calculated.  The row totals represent the total value of the industry in question.  Each cell in a row is then divided by the row total.  This creates a new Ratio of Value Added to CIXG by Industry table.

The Recoded CPS Dataset is copied, creating a new dataset.  Each worker entry in the new dataset is replicated 10 times, so that there are 11 identical copies of each worker.  For every worker, each of the 11 copies is assigned to a different segment of CIXG.  For each copy of every worker, the worker’s industry, and the copy’s segment of CIXG is used to look up the ratio of value that copy of the worker adds to that segment in the Ratio of Value Added to CIXG by Industry table.  That copy’s probability weight (p-weight) is then multiplied by the ratio.  In this manner, the sum of the p-weights of all eleven copies of the worker will equal the original p-weight of the worker before his or her entry was replicated.  This new dataset is called the Recoded Dataset with CIXG.


Returning to the Value Added by PCEs plus IXG Table (step 6), row totals for each producing industry are calculated.  Each cell in a row is then divided by the row total.  This creates a new Ratio of Value Added to PCEs plus IXG by Industry table.

The Recoded CPS Dataset is copied, creating a new dataset.  Each worker entry in the new dataset is replicated enough times so that there are identical copies of each worker for every PCE as well as a worker for investment, exports and government.  In the 1967 dataset, this results in 80 copies and 87 copies in the 2007 dataset.  For every worker, each of the copies is assigned to a different element of PCEs plus IXG.  For each copy of every worker, the worker’s industry and the copy’s segment of PCEs plus IXG is used to look up the ratio of value that copy of the worker adds to that segment in the Ratio of Value Added to Pces plus IXG by Industry table.  That copy’s probability weight (p-weight) is then multiplied by the ratio.  In this manner, the sum of the p-weights of all copies of the worker will equal the original p-weight of the worker before his or her entry was replicated.  This new dataset is called the Recoded Dataset with PCEs plus IXG.


For each dataset a series of tables with identical columns are produced, but depending on the dataset, the rows represent different values.  For the Recoded CPS Dataset, the rows represent all workers in a BEA Industry code.  For the Recoded Dataset with CIXG, the rows represent workers contribution to one of the eleven elements of CIXG.  For the Recoded Dataset with PCEs plus IXG, the rows represent workers’ contribution to either a specific PCE, or investment, exports, or government.

Each table is produced three times for each dataset, once with all workers in the dataset, and once with men, or women.  Most tables tables are produced with each cell representing the total number of workers belonging both to the row category and column category.

Of these tables, the following column categories are used: Income Quintiles, Age Category, Education Level, 21 Occupation Categories, 15 Occupation and Industry Categories.

In addition, tables with the median and mean number of hours worked per year, as well as median and mean incomes are also produced for each dataset, for all workers, for men, and for women.
