The procedure outlined below is conducted twice,
once on data from 1967 and once on data from 2007.
The only difference between the 1967 and 2007 procedure that will be discussed
is that in 2007, an industry to industry use table is derived as the very first step.
This is unnecessary in 1967, as its use table was already in an industry to industry form.

In order to derive the 2007 Industry to Industry Use Table,
both the 2007 Make and Use tables are combined as follows.
First, all of the value added rows from the Use table are temporarily discarded .
Then the cells in both tables are reduced to proportions.
Each cell in the use table is divided by its industry total,
while each cell in the make table is divided by its commodity total.
These percentage tables are joined together by commodity,
resulting in a 3 dimension matrix with the axes
Producing Industry by Commodity by Consuming Industry.
Each cell of commodity and consuming multiplied by each other
and totaled by producing industry.
The commodities are then dropped,
creating a two dimensional matrix of producing industry by consuming industry.
Each cell of this new matrix is multiplied by the total output of its consuming industry.
The discarded value added and intermediate output rows are added back into the table,
resulting in the 2007 industry to industry use table.

From this point on, any procedure done to one year can be assumed to be done to both.

The industry to industry use table for both years is altered to remove the effects of capital consumption.
Using data from the BEA National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) tables, the total capital consumed by each consuming industry in the use table is calculated
(in many cases, this total is zero).
This capital consumption is added,
as additional required input,
to specific industries that contribute to capital consumption.
The profits of each consuming industry are then reduced by the cost increase.
This ensures a consuming industry's total output remains the same,
even though the total of the producing industries has increased.
The new table produced by this procedure may be called an Industry to Industry Use Table with Capital Consumption Removed.

