During this step,
the total output of each industry (or final use) s accounted fro purely in terms of value directly and indirectly added to an industry.
It should be noted that at the end of this process,
the total of all industries' value added will be well above GDP.
This is not a problem,
as this value added table will be used only for its ratios.
E.g., approximately 6.8% of the value added to the industry "Oil and Gas Extraction"
comes from the "Pipeline Transportation" industry.

The first step is to calculate a direct requirements ratio table.
For each consuming industry,
the three value added "producing industries" are combined to create a single value added industry.
Then a total output is calculated,
and each producing industry's contribution to that consuming industry is divided by that consuming industry's total output.

A new value added table is created which is a replica of the industry to industry use table except that all of its cells are filled with zeros,
except for the cells where the producing and consuming industries are the same industry.
The value of those cells is set to the value of the value add for that industry in the use table.

Using the direct requirements ratio,
the industry to industry use table with capital consumption removed,
and the new value added table,
an iterative process is undertaken which calculates value indirectly added to each industry.
At each sept of the process:

1) In the industry to industry use table, each cell is decreased by its producing industry's value added ratio.
The amout that the cell is decreased by is added to the corresponding cell in the new value added table.

2) For each column in the industry to industry use table,
the remaining value in each cell is redistributed in the column at a rate determined by the producing industry's corresponding consuming industry's column in the direct requirements ratio table.

As the iterative process proceeds,
the total of all the cells in the industry to industry Use table approaches zero,
while the total of all the cells in the value added table approaches the original total of the industry to industry use table.
The only exception to this is that,
as the value an industry adds to itself is already accounted for,
at each step of the process,
any cell in which the consuming and producing industries are the same industry is replaced with a zero.
The process is repeated 16 times,
ensuring that the total of the cells in the value added table is over 99.9% of the original total of the industry to industry use table.
